---
title: "Introduction to single cell RNA-seq"
teaching: 30
exercises: 10
questions:
- "What is single-cell RNA-seq?"
- "What is the difference between bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq?"
- "How do I choose between bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq"
objectives:
- "Describe what single-cell RNA-seq is."
keypoints:
- "First key point. Brief Answer to questions. (FIXME)"
---

## Brief overview of technology 

Single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNAseq) is a method of quantifying transcript expression levels in individual cells. scRNAseq involves separating cells and introducing them into a microfluidic system which performs the chemistry on each cell indiviudally.

The steps in the process are:

1.  Cell isolation: 
    * If the cells are part of a tissue, the cells are disaggretaged using collagenase or other reagents. If the cells are in culture or suspension, they may be used as is.
2. Cell suspension:
    * Using a microfluidic system, each cell is suspended in a nanoliter-size water droplet along with a barcoded primer bead. The cells are kept separate from each other in an oil/water emulsion.
3. Cell lysis and transcript capture:
    * The cells are lysed in the droplet 

## Compare and contrast with bulk RNA-Seq 

- tissues are heterogeneous mixtures of diverse cell types.
- bulk RNA-seq measures average gene expression across diverse cell types.
- may be difficult to tell whether gene expression or cell populations are changing.

## What is scRNA-Seq useful for? 

- devleopmental studies.
- hematopoeisis.
- detailed tissue atlas.
- tumor clonality.

## Emphasize focus of this course: 10X Genomics, mouse

While there are several commercially available scRNA-seq technologies, this course will focus on data generated by the 10X Genomics platform. We will also focus on a mouse data set and note that most of the techniques that you will learn in this workshop apply to other species as well.  

{% include links.md %}

